and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
Tom Tom Turboville. It's a simple fact that World War II could not have been
thought much less one without naval construction battalions better known as
C-Bees. Today you'll meet John Blazons of Bryan but I dare say that many of you
already know him. After all he has lived all but ten of his 82 years in Bryan.
Born in Bryan, proud member of Stephen F Austin High School class of 1942.
Aggie class of 1947 and a proud sailor with the 105th C-Bees serving the
Pacific campaign at Australia, New Guinea and the Philippines at the late
take off. It's a pleasure to have you on Veterans of the Valley. I want to talk
about a man who probably knows Bryan as well as anybody. You were born here. I
know your dad was in the grocery business and also in the cotton business here.
Born in Bryan and spent like we said all but ten years in Bryan. Talk about
what Bryan, Texas, was like back in the the 1930s I guess when you were just a
young kid growing up. What was the town like? Well Bryan was Main Street. A few
businesses on Bryan Street. Basically everything went up and down Main Street.
All the grocery stores were there as well. There's the clothing stores and
the drug stores just about anything that you wanted at that time. So what we know
is downtown Bryan now that's just where practically all the commerce was. When
you wanted to buy something go to the grocery store, go to a movie, go get
clothes, you went to downtown Bryan. That's true. You parked at the curb and walked
into the bin as you wanted to deal with and then you drove two blocks down the
street and parked at the curb again. Right. Right. And Bryan as we know it today
wasn't anything like it then. It was pretty much a shrunk version of what we
see now because the paved roads were sort of few and far between. Right? That's
correct. Texas Avenue was Highway 6 and there was a paved street that went west to
serve Boo Elementary School and there was a paved street that went east to serve
Travis Elementary School. Right. That was pretty near it. So if you wanted to get
from Bryan say a downtown Bryan to Texas A&M you would take Highway 6 up to
what we know is the as the bins right now and then that would go on to
College Avenue on to campus. That's how you got to campus right? College Avenue
Old College Road and what is now a well-run road to get to campus. Right. Of course
you had Texas A&M on the on the other side and then you had Bryan. What was
how did the how did the citizenry and all of that deal with Texas A&M?
Obviously Texas A&M was a big industry there just like it is now. Yes and of
course Bryan probably felt then much like College Station does now. The home of
Texas A&M. Right. Right. Right. It was the agriculture and mechanical college. You
said that your dad was in the cotton business. Cotton was a big industry back
then in in Bryan and that had a lot to do with the railroad I guess right? Well
cotton was the valley the branches bottom the farmers raised mostly cotton as
far as a pay. Right. Right. Right. You went to Stephen F. Austin as a matter of
fact this this past summer it's actually after we're taping this but before
it's airing on TV in June you had a reunion at the class of 1942 of Stephen
F. Austin high school. A lot of people of course obviously know that was the
pre of what we know now is Bryan high school. Talk a little bit about Stephen
F. Austin back in the back in the 40s obviously it was a it was a wonderful
school a lot of great memories. Well yes Stephen F. Austin was a new high school
and the more junior high school originated in the original high school
building so that when I went Stephen F. Austin was only about three three
years old and the facility is today. Right. And we had the three classes and lots
of football support of course that was still the number one sport. Speaking of
football you were the class of 1942 but you actually didn't receive your
diploma until after the fall of 1942 and that had something to do with
football and your desire to play quarterback that last year in the fall of
42 sort of talk about how that worked. Well it was just fact that you could play
high school football until you were 18 and so I was 17 and was eligible to play
another semester. Right. Did not graduate in May of 42 but came back that
fall and took one took an English class or something like that or took a
couple of classes in the fall so you could be eligible for football right.
Yes English was one of the state mandated courses right if you didn't have all
your English credits you couldn't graduate. Right so you waited to the fall to
take that so you could play football and then and then finished and I think you
told me you were the first T-formation quarterback of Brian of Brian
higher Stephen F. Austin right. Yes that's true. That's great. Right after you
graduated from from high school you you entered Texas A&M so actually that
would have been in the in the spring semester I guess earlier January of
of 1943 that's when you enter Texas A&M. That's correct yeah yeah. I went one
semester to Texas A&M and then the course we were already involved in the
war this being in 1943 then talk about your desire to enter the service and
particularly the Navy and you sort of had the timing was such to where if you
wanted to be in the Navy you had to go to Houston on a particular time and
and say hello to the draft office sort of talk about your desire to be in the
Navy. Well at 18 you became draft eligible and we had to we looked at the
military and some of us wanted to be in the Navy and others wanted to wait until
they were drafted and I was one of those that had the desire to be in the Navy.
Right so your dad took you to Houston on the day that when the draft the draft
these were being put in the Navy so you timed it that way on purpose so that
that's correct that's correct. Right and tell us where you were sent initially I
know you were sent to the East Coast and then a long long trip to the West Coast
so after you you up sort of talk about your training before you went overseas.
Well there was a CB training base at Williamsburg Virginia right on the
Chesapeake Bay and we were sent there for what they call boot camp still and
then we were assigned to battalions and moved out to different parts of the
world. Right so one and tell you went to Virginia that you realized that you
were going to be assigned to the construction battalion and that you're you were
going to be a CB right? Yes I was told that was a CB before yeah for we left Texas
before you left Texas so you knew what you were in for and that you would be
there. A three-week train ride from Virginia to California and they took quite a
route. You remember that three-week train ride a lot don't you? Yes I suppose it
was for security purposes but we went up into Ohio and back down to the Texas
Panhandle and then the train went all the way to South Chicago and then back
down to New Mexico and finally up through Salt Lake City and crossed the
mountains there into California. Three weeks on the train yeah that was quite
a ride and quite an indirect route to get there. Port Wainibi I believe it is in
Southern California which is a base that is known for its training of
CB's is one of the largest CB centers are the largest on the West Coast. Talk
about that and it still exists with the museum there I believe. Well that was the
base for our battalion organized itself in a big manner and went through
typical training. We had all the rumors of going to Alaska or going to South
Pacific at a bounded and I guess every military organization but we were being
prepared. John I want you to talk about about the CB's I have always been
personally just fascinated with the work that they did while some people might
not consider it the big action spot of the war. It's true I mean the work
could not have been fought could not have been won without what the CB's did
especially in the Pacific theater and the Pacific campaign because you all
built stuff. You all made something out of nothing as far as as far as a
runways as far as a quatsit huts like you talk about bridges, piers and things
like that. Talk about the CB's to the people that may not be familiar with
exactly what the role of the CB's was in World War II. Well in an island war of
course each each island had its individual problems and CB's went in and our
job was to prepare air strips or to prepare buildings for training or for
and some hospitals. We built our battalion built a base for PT boats in the
Philippines and so we did a little bit of all kinds of construction work and that
permitted those involved in the actual combat to go about their business without
worrying about details maybe. Right. Well planes needed to run away to
land on and once they got there they needed a place to live. Storage was a big
deal obviously because there was equipment constantly being supplied to the
Pacific theater where you're going to put all this stuff. One of the things you
were involved in was the building of quatsit huts and not just for people to
live but you talked about how they were strung together to make warehouses so
you were having into construction right. Yes well I was assigned to a crew that
was primarily involved in building quatsit huts. We built small ones for office
recorders we built large ones for people to live in the crews and everything
are we built tied them together and a way to make some very enormous warehouse
facilities because the supplies that were coming to the Pacific was very
enormous. When we went to the Philippines I think that there were over 150
ships in Lady Gough at one time right at the time of the re invasion. Right.
Right. And when we're talking about supplies we're not just talking about guns
and ammo and things like that. We're talking about tanks and trucks and and the
vehicles that it took to to fight the war. I mean we're talking about large
large equipment that you all had to deal with in fine place for. Yes that and food.
An enormous amount of food had to be brought in to serve our troops. Right. Right.
And this is food I guess that you had to make sure that that didn't spoil and had
to be properly cared for and all that and feed the troops. So it's just a
fascinating part of the war the the Navy CBCs. When you left California initially
I want to back up a little bit you first went to down south to Australia and
then straight north of Australia to New Guinea before you went to the
Philippines. So sort of talk about your route from California and what you did
at each place. Well rather than a convoy our troop ship was alone so it went as
far south as it could reasonably go and then in order to avoid Japanese
submarines and then circle around and then came back north and landed on the
east coast of Australia or at least we anchored for about a month before
they moved us on north to New Guinea. Right. Right. And of course at that time
combat was still underway on the island of New Guinea and then when they got
ready to recapture the Philippine islands well then we were loaded on to
transports that had all of our supplies and equipment on them and we had
it north and ended up at Lady Gulf on the same day that General Mike Arthur
returned. I see I see. The late take off obviously a hotspot of the of the
Pacific campaign and while you say you weren't directly involved in combat
operations you could you could hear it from where you were right. That's
correct. They were pretty close to us anyway. Right. Right. You said that one of
the things that your unit did was build piers and you believe that possibly
where you were may have been involved were former president John F. Kennedy and
his PT both might have docked because he was in the Philippines at one time in
his in his service right. Yes there was a PT base between the island of
Latia and the island of Samar. The ocean channel there was pretty narrow and
PT boats should come in there and dock and resurface and make plans to go back
into the ocean. Right. Right. We've got three photos that Mr. Blazons has
supplied us. These are photos from his home. They want to show you a young John
Blazons at Texas A&M and then later in the Navy and you can see that picture
right there that's is that your senior picture at Texas A&M when we had it
up on the screen and now it has gone away. Oh there we go. There you are back
again. Is that your senior photo at Texas A&M? Well I would more or less say that
was my freshman photo because when after the war I did not have to be in the
core. That's right. That's right. You weren't in the core so that would have been
your your first year that one semester before you went into the Navy. Quite a
good luck in young man. Wow. And then the next photo is a little later when you
were in a Navy photograph so this was taken just a few years later. Yes. Right.
And now we've got a picture of one of your units as you can see we're going to
enlarge that a little bit. You can see that that's from a book sort of an annual
yearbook that was made of the 105th CBC Chief Lamby's crew and I believe you said
that you were on the the back row sort of in the middle. Is that right?
Fourth from the left? Yes. There you are. You have fourth from the left on the
back row. So that was essentially the laboring crew right there that you worked
with? That's correct. That particular time and we were building these all storage
tanks in the Philippines. They were built from sheets of steel which were
connected with nuts and bolts and washers. And that's one of the storage tanks
that you're sitting in that you're standing in front of. Right. And these
storage tanks, I know you talked to me earlier about a lot of the
storage that you all did was oil and things like that and that was kind of a
dicey situation in case the enemy should come over. You didn't want that
that oil sitting out there because that would have been a bomb way to go off.
Well that's probably true although by the time we were building on those the
United States had pretty much air superiority. Right. Right. Right. You were in the
Philippines when the war ended and at that time I believe you said you had your
choice of joining the occupational forces or going home and you decided to go
home and continue your education. Sort of talk about that decision and what
your desires were then. Well I guess at that age I still
wouldn't 21 and I had been away from home over two years and I got a little
home sick as well as wanting to get back into school. Indeed. And all you were
overseas for two years. So you had served a good service there from December
43 to December of 1945 and you came back home and you went right back into
Texas A&M while you were class of 47 you ended up not getting out until
1950 because of your your war service and you took your CB experience and went
right into a civil engineering. Is that right? Talk about that and what your
career was after that. Well that basically that's one of the life's events that
made me decide what I wanted to do and I came back and said I wanted a major
in civil engineering. Right. Which I did. And you helped build highways. Is that
what you worked for the highway department for several years? I worked for
Texas Highway Department or now the Department of Transportation for 37 years.
It's been eight years in Brinham? Yeah. Talk about what you did then. Well I was in
the residency there and we were contracting and constructing various highways
and Washington County at that time. Right including 290 that goes around Brinham
you know. That's correct. Then I came to Brinham and I was made the district
construction engineer in the Brinham district which encompasses 10 counties
that surround Brinham County. One thing we haven't talked about is your
athletic career. We talked about that you played quarterback for Stephen F. Austin
your senior year but then you became a baseball man as a matter of fact you're
wearing your baseball tie today. You played for Marty Keros, Texas A&M
team I believe for a year and you were what you described yourself as a as a
scrub but you were a middle-end fielder and so talk about your experiences in
baseball which later became actually a semi-pro career in Brinham. So talk
about John Blazons and his baseball career. Well I had played baseball with
local teams in Bryan while I was at A&M and as I mentioned before one year in
1948 Marty Keros said he was shorthanded and he put out a call and it was kind of
like the 12th man. A couple hundred of us came out and we worked out for two or
three weeks at different times and he chose about four of us to be on the baseball
squad. This is sort of a 12th man story that few people know about is the call
for the baseball team and you say a couple hundred showed up and it just sort of
got paired down and paired down and you were one of four that made the eventual
cut. I was one of the lucky ones and I enjoyed the experience of being on the
NM baseball team and we get season tickets and go to all the games we can.
Now this was back when the baseball field was in essentially what the parking lot
of Kyle Field is now right? That's correct. Yeah and then your baseball career
continued somewhat when you went to Brinham because you played for the semi-pro
team there in Brinham the Brinham Lions right? That's correct they had the
semi-pro team there but mostly local Brinham men and boys and we played
different teams all around Texas from Houston primarily and teams like
Gittings and the Grange and at that time they all had had baseball teams. Right
right and there was a fellow on this Brinham team who had a sister named
Madeline. Yeah yeah that worked out pretty good for you. And they sure did. I've
been married to Madeline for 56 years. That's right so you met her she was
she was a sister of one of your one of your teammates. That's correct. So you
made and you all have been married for some 56 years now and you still love
baseball you still love I think you said you even pitched for your for your
church when you were 65 in the softball league right? So it's obviously a lot
slower pitch is that right? You and Madeline were married talk a little bit about
your family I know you have a couple of kids and and and grandkids talk about
your kids and what they do you are fortunate in that your kids and your grandkids
both live here in the area right? That's correct. Our son David has a small
construction company called Braco Blaco I beg you put him, Blaco construction and
he does work in the local area and they he and his wife Beth have one son Andrew
who will be 18 this year right and then our daughter Sarah as she's an
Aggie sociality graduate and she works with Brian independent school district
right and she and her husband have two children read who is 16 and Melissa who is
12 right and so they're both in the community reading Melissa or swimmers and
they do competitive swimming and so I think you said your daughter with the BISD
is involved with a lot of the families that are still in the area that
worry about you ease from Katrina so that takes up a lot of her time right? She's
involved with some of those who are students at Brian Hasky. Right I want to rewind
a little bit some of your times at Texas A&M that you talked about you can
recall December 7th 1941 you were 16 you were in high school and what did your
dad say to you about that time it turned out to be a profitable statement
or he turned out to be a profit on the statement. Yes that's true when we heard
about it that day and he looked at me and and said if this lasts long enough
you'll get in you'll be involved and he was right and he was right indeed you
were involved in the war when you when you were in high school you did come to
A&M campus every once in a while to ten football games like you said you
were when the not-whole league came up you were you were able to watch
Aggie football games what do you remember about Aggie football back when you
were in high school? Well for us Aggie football was the only football at that
time exactly we watched them and supported them strongly right and I don't
know whether the worship is the right word we worship the stars that came up
along the days 1930's Todd and John Kimbrue 39 they won the National
Champion Championship so you were yeah yeah you were here at that time you tell
me a funny story about when Franklin D Roosevelt came to college station and
came to Kyle Field and and sort of they sort of recruited people to make it
look crowded at Kyle Field right? Right he made a speech there and I think
in Tarsedia Bryan closed down just about and everybody went out to Kyle Field
and it made it look like there was a crowd in the grandstand and you were one of
them there it was there was in the background right? Right right the Navy
C-beats again it's a facet of the of the of the service that I'm fascinated
with you're obviously being a member of the C-beats is something that you're
you're very proud of because it obviously gave you your career gave you the
skills that that that gave your career sort of talk about your deep
feelings of your lifelong feelings about this this group and the people? Well
it's sometimes difficult to express how you feel about an organization these
were people who came from all parts of life the leaders of the C-beats were
experienced construction people right? You mentioned chief lambing who was from
Lufkin he had been in the construction business for a number of years and so
those of us who were came in and say through the draft and we were assigned
there to perform the labor but there were a lot of those young men who became
accomplished and skilled at certain amounts of parts of the work some of us got
a hold of construction equipment we had never seen right when we were building
the peers you know there were a lot of drills and jackhammers and solves that
that went on and and the young guys were the ones that had to perform that
work right so we've been I have been proud that that the organization has set up
these museums their museums for all facets of the military service around
the Mississippi and in California now there are CB museums which have
recorded some of the work that the C-beats did right and it wasn't much I
like John Wayne's movie where they got into a battle but occasionally it was
frightening yeah well I think it's just incredible some of the pictures that I've
seen especially in the Philippines and and Okinawa and Guadalcanal where they
would take a landscape that was just forest and they could just flatten that out
and make runways that the biggest bombers could land on it's almost mind
boggling what the CVs could do with their skills and and not a whole lot of
equipment but just with their skills it's entirely fascinating well that's sort
of thing kind of creates pride in an organization absolutely always valued
that experience growing up that's the way to put it and making some life
decision life decisions but John Blazons were out of time but thank you for
your service and thank you for being here and as a proud Navy CB and thank
your Gears Service of World War II and a lifelong Brian Knight you help make
the city what it is thank you very much thank you for the opportunity all right
John Blazons and his wife Madeline are proud parents of a son and a daughter
and three grandchildren they live in their home that they built in Brian in
1960 the skills that he learned as a Navy CB in World War II served him well
in his career as a high women we salute John Blazons and all the proud members
of Navy construction battalions who served our country and we salute all
veterans I'm Tom Turbivill join us next time on Veterans of the Valley